Environmental Values  
Linda Steg
  and Judith I. M. de Groot
The Oxford Handbook of Environmental and Conservation Psychology
Edited by Susan D. Clayton

1).

However, relationships between social value orientations and environmental 
beliefs, preferences, and intentions are generally weak, and sometimes 
even not significant. For example, social value orientations were not 
significantly related to preferences for commuting by car versus public 
transport (Joireman, Van Lange, & Van Vugt, 2004) and environmental 
behavior (Joireman et al., 2001)

Individuals who strongly endorse egoistic values will particularly consider costs and benefits of environmental actions for them personally, and act pro-environmentally when the perceived benefits of such actions exceed the perceived costs (and vice versa). For example, a person who strongly endorses egoistic values is likely to act pro-environmentally if the pro-environmental option also happens to be the cheapest or most comfortable option. In contrast, individuals who strongly endorse altruistic values will focus on the perceived costs and benefits of actions for other people. They may, for example, engage in pro-environmental actions, such as purchasing organic produce, when this benefits the health of their children. Finally, individuals who strongly endorse biospheric values will mainly base their choices on the perceived costs and benefits of actions for nature and the environment, and act pro-environmentally when these actions are likely to reduce environmental problems.

Although all three value types provide a distinct basis for pro-environmental actions, and thus all may promote pro-environmental beliefs and choices, studies generally reveal that individuals who more strongly endorse altruistic and particularly biospheric values have more positive pro-environmental beliefs and norms, and are more likely to engage in pro-environmental behavior than those who strongly endorse egoistic values (e.g., Honkanen & Verplanken, 2004; De Groot & Steg, 2008, 2010; Karp, 1996; Nilsson et al., 2004; Steg et al., 2005; Steg et al., 2011; Stern et al., 1998), probably because many pro-environmental behaviors have individual disadvantages, as explained at the very start of this chapter.